This GitHub page includes all relevant codes for the snRNA-seq, Slide-seq, and MERFISH data analyses in the associated publication "Molecular Cartography of the Human and Mouse Down Syndrome Brain".

# Abstract:

Down syndrome (DS, or Trisomy 21) is one of the most common genetic causes of intellectual disability. DS results in both abnormal neurodevelopment and accelerated neurodegeneration, but the molecular mechanisms underlying abnormal cortical construction and aging are incompletely understood. To gain molecular insight into the prenatal neurobiology of DS, we performed single-nucleus sequencing, spatial transcriptomics, and proteomics on mid-gestational prenatal human brain tissue. We captured altered expression dynamics of lineage commitment genes in DS neural progenitor cells, which suggest changes to the fate and functionality of neuronal and glial cells. Given the importance of linking human and model system pathobiology, we also performed highly multiplexed RNA in situ spatial transcriptomics on a well-established trisomic mouse model (Ts65Dn) to study the cellular landscape of the trisomic brain during early life and aging. We profiled the spatial transcriptome of > 240,000 cells in the mouse brain and identified trisomy-associated gene expression patterns in the molecular control of neurogenesis, gliogenesis, and myelination. Together, our study provides a comprehensive cross-species understanding of the complex multicellular processes underlying DS neurodevelopment.
